{{DISPLAYTITLE:Vsmart Active 1 (vsmart-zangyapro)}}
{{Infobox device

<!-- Main -->
| manufacturer = Vsmart
| name         = Active 1
| codename     = vsmart-zangyapro
| model        = PQ6001
| image        = File:vsmart-zangyapro.jpg
| imagecaption = Vsmart Active 1 running postmarketOS
| releaseyear  = 2018

| booting  = yes
| packaged = no
| category = testing

<!-- Hardware -->
| chipset = Qualcomm Snapdragon 660 (SDM660)
| cpu     = 4x 2.2 GHz Kryo 260 Gold, 4x 1.8 GHz Kryo 260 Silver
| gpu     = Adreno 512
| display = 1080 x 2160 LCD, Himax HX83112A (DJN)
| storage = 64 GB
| memory  = 4 GB
| architecture = aarch64

<!-- Software -->
| originalsoftware = Android
| originalversion  = 9
| status_fossbootloader = N

<!-- postmarketOS -->
| type        = handset
| pmoskernel  = Mainline 7.0
| firmwarepackage = {{Firmware package|vsmart-zangyapro|testing}}

| supported      = yes
| prebuiltimages = no
| initial_MR   = <!-- {{MR|CHANGE_ME|pmaports}} khi mở MR -->

<!-- Features: Main -->
| status_flashing = Y
| status_usbnet   = Y
| status_emmc     = Y
| status_sdcard   = <!-- enabled in DT, chưa có thẻ để test runtime -->
| status_battery  = P
| status_screen   = Y
| status_touch    = N
| status_keyboard = -

<!-- Features: Multimedia -->
| status_3d     = Y
| status_audio  =
| status_camera =

<!-- Features: Connectivity -->
| status_wifi      = Y
| status_bluetooth = Y
| status_gps   =
| status_nfc   =

<!-- Features: Modem -->
| status_calls =
| status_sms   =
| status_mobiledata =

<!-- Features: Misc -->
| status_otg  =
| status_fde  =
| status_fingerprint =

<!-- Features: Sensors -->
| status_haptics =
| status_accel   =
| status_proximity =
}}{{Based on SoC|Qualcomm_Snapdragon_660_(SDM660)|Snapdragon 660}}

The '''Vsmart Active 1''' (codename '''vsmart-zangyapro''') is a 2018 Snapdragon 660 handset. It is a
rebrand of the '''BQ Aquaris X2 Pro''' and very close to the '''[[Xiaomi Mi A2 (xiaomi-jasmine_sprout)]]''';
this port is derived from the latter and shares its mainline kernel. It is used here as a small
'''headless home server'''.

{{Note|1=The Vsmart bootloader enforces dm-android-verity and injects <code>skip_initramfs</code> /
<code>dm=...android-verity...</code> into the kernel command line, which blocks Android GSIs. The mainline
kernel ignores these parameters (they are passed to userspace), so postmarketOS boots without any verity
workaround. '''lk2nd is not required.'''}}

== Contributors ==
* [[User:Fudio101|Fudio101]]

== Users owning this device ==
{{Device owners}}

== Unlocking the bootloader ==
{{Erase data warning}}
# Enable '''OEM unlocking''' and USB debugging in Android developer options.
# Reboot to fastboot ({{button|Volume Down}} + {{button|Power}}) and run:
#: <syntaxhighlight lang="shell-session">
fastboot flashing unlock
fastboot flashing unlock_critical
</syntaxhighlight>
<code>fastboot oem unlock</code> is not supported on this bootloader.

== How to enter flash mode ==
Hold {{button|Volume Down}} + {{button|Power}} to boot into fastboot mode.

== Installation ==
Follow the [[Installation guide]]. The mainline kernel sidesteps the OEM verity, so a plain boot image works:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell-session">
pmbootstrap init        # vendor: vsmart, device: zangyapro
pmbootstrap install
pmbootstrap flasher flash_kernel     # -> boot partition
pmbootstrap flasher flash_rootfs     # -> userdata
fastboot reboot
</syntaxhighlight>

To test without flashing: <code>pmbootstrap flasher boot</code> (or <code>fastboot boot boot.img</code>).

{{Note|'''Flashing the rootfs over a 32-bit <code>fastboot.exe</code> (Windows):''' large
<code>fastboot flash userdata</code> transfers fail on this stack ("Invalid sparse file format" /
"Write to device failed"). Split the raw image into ~20 MB sparse chunks (<code>img2simg</code> +
<code>simg2simg ... 20000000</code>) and flash them sequentially; a USB-2.0 hub improves stability.}}

== Running as a headless server ==
* '''Power draw''' (idle: WiFi + Bluetooth + console) is about '''2.4 W'''; under heavy CPU load ~4-5 W.
* The 3100 mAh battery (manufacturer rating; the device tree uses a 3000 mAh design value for the fuel
  gauge) acts as a '''built-in UPS''': at idle it lasts roughly '''~4.5 h from 100%''' (~3.5 h from 80%)
  on battery alone. Figures are indicative — computed from the 3000 mAh design figure on a used unit with a
  degraded battery.
* '''<code>qbootctl</code>''' (hard dependency) marks the active A/B slot "successful" at every boot.
  Without it the bootloader counts down the slot retry counter and eventually drops to fastboot.
* Connect over USB (<code>ssh user@172.16.42.1</code>) or WiFi. Bluetooth auto-starts at boot.

{{Warning|Charging needs a real &ge;2 A wall charger. BC1.2 detection works: a weak/laptop (SDP) port is
capped at ~450 mA, less than the running load, so the battery slowly drains even while "Charging". A 2 A DCP
charger pulls ~1.5 A and charges at ~1.1 A while running. A warm <code>reboot</code> on a low/weak battery may
brown out and hang; keep the device on a 2 A+ charger.}}

== Forcing USB Host Mode ==
{{Note|1=Only needed if you want USB host (drive/hub/keyboard); skip for plain headless use. '''Not yet
verified on this device''' — the Active 1 device tree currently sets <code>dr_mode = "peripheral"</code>;
the procedure below is adapted from the Mi A2 and would also need the device tree switched off peripheral-only
mode.}}
This device shares the SDM660 kernel <code>linux-postmarketos-qcom-sdm660</code> with the
[[Xiaomi Mi A2 (xiaomi-jasmine_sprout)#Forcing USB Host Mode|Xiaomi Mi A2]]: the DWC3 controller does not
auto-switch to host mode. On the Mi A2 the shared kernel is rebuilt with '''Host only''' mode and a
'''powered''' USB-C hub is required (the port does not supply VBUS):

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell-session">
pmbootstrap kconfig edit linux-postmarketos-qcom-sdm660
# Device Drivers -> USB support -> DWC3 -> DWC3 Mode Selection -> Host only
pmbootstrap build linux-postmarketos-qcom-sdm660 --force
pmbootstrap flasher flash_kernel
</syntaxhighlight>

== Hardware ==
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Component !! Chip
|-
| SoC || Qualcomm Snapdragon 660 (SDM660)
|-
| GPU || Adreno 512 (freedreno, zap shader <code>a512_zap.mbn</code>)
|-
| Display / Touch || Himax HX83112A (DJN), 1080x2160 — touch in-cell parked
|-
| WiFi / Bluetooth || Qualcomm WCN3990 (ath10k <code>board-2.bin</code>)
|-
| PMIC || Qualcomm PM660 + PM660L
|-
| Fuel gauge || PMI8998 (<code>pmi8998_fg</code>)
|}

== Quirks / Known issues ==
=== Touchscreen (Himax HX83112A) — Parked ===
Touch IC on i2c-0 (<code>c175000.i2c</code>) at '''0x48''' (irq gpio67, reset gpio66), product id
'''0x83112a'''. The mainline <code>himax_hx83112b</code> driver only knows <code>0x83112b</code>; the wrong
variant bound and probe failed. Parked; not needed for headless use.
{{Todo|Add the 0x83112a chip variant to the HX83112x touch driver.}}

=== microSD slot ===
Enabled in the device tree but not yet runtime-tested (no card on hand).

=== WiFi MAC address is randomised ===
The WCN3990 has no MAC stored for mainline to read, so the WiFi interface gets a '''random MAC on every
boot'''. WiFi itself works; if you rely on DHCP reservations, pin a fixed MAC (e.g. a NetworkManager
<code>cloned-mac-address</code> setting or a systemd-networkd <code>.link</code> file).

=== Audio ===
Untested — not used on this headless server.

=== Battery percentage inaccurate after a flat discharge ===
<code>pmi8998_fg</code> reads state-of-charge directly from the fuel-gauge register (no DT OCV table). After a
flat discharge the FG loses its reference until a full charge cycle recalibrates it.

=== Modem (calls / SMS / data) ===
{{Todo|Test the modem — firmware is present but calls/SMS/data are untested.}}

=== Dropped to fastboot after running flat ===
A/B device: if the active slot is not marked "successful", the bootloader decrements its retry counter each
power-cycle and eventually lands in fastboot. Recovery: <code>fastboot set_active a && fastboot reboot</code>.
Fixed permanently by the <code>qbootctl</code> dependency.

== Notes ==
* Display works through the real DPU + DSI + panel pipeline. The mainline <code>panel-himax-hx83112a</code>
  (Fairphone 3, 1080x2340) was extended with a <code>djn,a1-hx83112a</code> 1080x2160 variant for this device.
* WiFi/BT use the same WCN3990 as the Mi A2; the firmware (<code>board-2.bin</code>) lives in the rootfs
  (<code>firmware-vsmart-zangyapro</code>), so it is absent during <code>fastboot boot</code> probes.

== See also ==
* [[Xiaomi Mi A2 (xiaomi-jasmine_sprout)]] — same SoC, shared kernel
* [[Help:Device Page]]
* [https://app.element.io/#/room/#sdm660-mainline:matrix.org Chat room: SDM660 devices development]
* [https://github.com/sdm660-mainline/linux Kernel source (sdm660-mainline/linux)] — series retargeted to <code>qcom-sdm660-7.0.y</code> (PR #186)
* [https://github.com/fudio101/active1-pmos Port working tree (fudio101/active1-pmos)]
